---
layout: single
title: "Example"
date: 2024-12-13
excerpt: "We will learn about the application of interest rates in Actuarial Science."
author: Nicholas Wijaya
toc: true
classes: wide
header: 
  image: "/assets/images/stethoscope-financial-graphs-scaled.jpg"
permalink: /posts/interest-rates/
tags: [post, blog, jekyll]
---

> *Interest rates. Something that we have encountered multiple times during our finance classes and in our daily lives. Examples of interest rates are coupon rates in bonds, or forward rates in derivatives. Essentially, the interest rate tells us the percent growth of an amount of fund $X_t$ at some time t over a specified time period, typically in the next year. This concept is very useful especially for actuaries in order to calculate cashflows of their client's portfolios in order to get a good overview of their financial risk. In this article, I will bring to you the different interest rates around actuarial literature that can be useful to actuaries.*

# Head 1

# Head 2

# Head 3

# Head 4

# Head 5

# Head 6

# Head 7

# Effective Interest Rates and Its Downsides

Effective interest rate (per unit time, i.e., 10% per annum) tells us that at the end of a time period, the fund $X_t$ will grow by 10% to $X_{t+1}$. Essentially, we can consider this as a simple interest rate where we assume that the interest is paid at the end of the year. This can be visualized by the formula below.

$$
X_1 = X_0(1+i)
$$

However, this concept is quite flawed in its essence. Sure, it is easy and more understandable for the normal person to assume that the interest will be paid out at the end of the year, but in this concept of effective interest rates, we are not able to calculate the growth of a fund $X_t$ at any time between that one time period (i.e., calculating the fund at $t=0.06$ between $0<t<1$) except for the amount at the end of the time period. Thus, this interest rate concept is regarded as *discrete* in nature. Essentially, the fund amount in any $t$ between $0<t<1$ will therefore still remain at the original amount of $X_t$ because at $t=0.06$, we have not received the interest yet.

# Force of Interest

It is no other than the force of interest, denoted as \( \delta_t \), which can be considered as the interest earned in an "infinitesimally" small time interval. This force of interest can be variable (in terms of $t$) or constant (i.e., 0.05). A variable force of interest that allows us to calculate force of interest at some future time point is also called the *forward interest rate*.

Let us start with a step-by-step proof of this force of interest to show how we can use it to calculate the growth of some fund $X_t$.

First, we need some prerequisites. The interest \( \delta_t \) earned in a small time interval $dt$ from a fund of $X_t$ is equivalent to the increase in fund $X_t$, denoted as $dX_t$, which can be visualized as follows:

$$
X_t * \delta_t \, dt = dX_t
$$

Rearranging the equation, with \( \delta_t \) as the subject, we get:

$$
\delta_t = \frac{1}{X_t} * \frac{dX_t}{dt}
$$

# The Relationship between Force of Interest and Effective Interest Rates

Taking a glance back, we see that effective interest rates cannot calculate interest built up between a time period, while the force of interest can. The latter is desired, but in the real world, actuaries are often only served effective interest rates. 

In order to find the relationship between effective rates and the force of interest, we assume equality between the two accumulation functions. Consider the interest accumulated at a time interval $0<t<1$, using the constant force of interest (to simplify calculations), equivalent to the interest accrued using the effective interest rate:

$$
e^{\int_0^1 \delta \, ds} = e^{\delta} = (1+i)
$$
